---
layout: post
title: How to Design an Embed Script
categories: []
tags: []
status: draft
type: post
---
For the past year, I've been researching third-party client libraries. Like Google Analytics or Optimizely, [Appcues](http://appcues.com) gives its customers a snippet of Javascript for them to embed on their site. I've studied dozens of embed scripts and have learned a ton through our own customer implementation.

If you're building a third-party client library, this article is for you.

### Considerations

There are a handful of things you'll need to decide before you dive in:

- Synchronous or asynchronous?
- Do you offer an API?
- How frequently will your script or API change?
- Are you rendering content (js, css, html)?

These decisions may seem easy to make, but they're far more complicated to execute properly.

### They myth of synchronous javascript

The choice between sync vs async has actually been made for you. The short answer: **always assume you'll be loaded asynchronously.**

Until just a few years ago, blocking js patterns were the norm. Some scripts started loading themselves asynchronously (think Mixpanel or KISSmetrics), but in either case, those script tags were added to the HTML just as Mixpanel or KISSmetrics provided them.

With new loading conventions like AMD and CommonJS, embed scripts have little say over how they're loaded. Because of that, you should always assume your script will be loaded asynchronously, so it should be designed accordingly.

### How to expose an API

If you believe in the above, there's only one right way to expose your API, and that's as a queue. There are a couple of patterns you can use to do that:

#### 1. Expose an Array

This is how Google used to do it, and how most libraries still do it. Basically, you expose an array and fill it with calls, like this:

{% highlight js %}
window._gaq = window._gaq || [];
_gaq.push(['track', 'pageview', {some: 'data'}]);
{% endhighlight %}

This method is well known, easy to design, and it exposes a consistent API. The main disadvantage is that the consumer has no idea what API methods are available.

#### 2. Expose a Function

A similar alternative is to expose a function which essentially does the same thing. This is how Google now does it with their Universal Analytics script.

{% highlight js %}
window['GoogleAnalyticsObject'] = 'ga';
window['ga'] = window['ga'] || function() {
    (window['ga'].q = window['ga'].q || []).push(arguments);
};
window['ga'].l = 1 * new Date();

var scriptEl = document.createElement('script'),
    firstScript = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0];

scriptEl.async = 1;
scriptEl.src = '//www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js';
firstScript.parentNode.insertBefore(scriptEl, firstScript);
{% endhighlight %}

It's almost identical to the array method, but calling methods now feel more natural and less error prone. When the real js script finally does load, you also have just one stub function to override, and it's not the native `Array.push`.

#### 3. Expose Stubs

Mixpanel and Segment.io use this method. This technique initializes an array with stub methods, each with their own queue.

{% highlight js %}
window.analytics = window.analytics || [];

// A list of the methods in Analytics.js to stub.
window.analytics.methods = ['identify', 'group', 'track',
  'page', 'pageview', 'alias', 'ready', 'on', 'once', 'off',
  'trackLink', 'trackForm', 'trackClick', 'trackSubmit'];

// Define a factory to create stubs. These are placeholders
// for methods in Analytics.js so that you never have to wait
// for it to load to actually record data. The `method` is
// stored as the first argument, so we can replay the data.
window.analytics.factory = function(method){
  return function(){
    var args = Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments);
    args.unshift(method);
    window.analytics.push(args);
    return window.analytics;
  };
};

// For each of our methods, generate a queueing stub.
for (var i = 0; i < window.analytics.methods.length; i++) {
  var key = window.analytics.methods[i];
  window.analytics[key] = window.analytics.factory(key);
}
// ...
{% endhighlight %}

Unlike the basic array method, this technique lets the consumer see what methods are available, **but with one major tradeoff:** your API can't be updated without asking consumers to update their embed scripts.

### Safely adding content

This is a huge topic, and one that will constantly be evolving with browsers. As it stands today, the major things to remember are:

- Sandbox your content in an iframe.
- Escape HTML and watch for XSS vulnerabilities.
- Don't assume the DOM has loaded before injecting content.
- Create your own element tags to ensure CSS namespacing.

### Getting fancy

I'm a huge fan of Google's new embed script. The minified version is so damn efficient, and they cleverly define the variables they need without using the `var` keyword.

{% highlight js %}
(function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){
  i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;
  i[r]=i[r]||function(){
    (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
})(window,document,'script','//www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');
{% endhighlight %}

The coolest thing about their script is that the closure's arguments spell the word **isogram**, which means "a word or phrase without a repeating letter". It's so meta I love it! *Swoon.* As an added benefit, they forego the need for variable definitions or scoping via the `var` keyword.

### Implementation is crucial

While it's really nice to have the one-line install script, it's often not the best option. If your script needs to be loaded quickly and used asynchronously, you'll need a queue-based embed script. If you're just servicing WordPress installations or have full control over how your script gets loaded, the one-line install is more feasible.

Another avenue to explore is framework middleware. Intercom.io did a good job of building middleware libraries for Django, Rails, etc. that inject themselves into the page. It's a handy way to control the implementation and have a better path for upgrades.

### Going beyond

There are tons of things I didn't cover in this post. Caching, initialization, and draining the queue could be blog posts of on their own.

If you've seen an embed script pattern you really like, I'd love to hear about it! If there's a particular topic you think I should dive into more, let me know too.
